NUMA (Non-Uniform Memory Access) Architecture is a specialized memory architecture for multiprocessor based systems where a set of CPUs on one system memory bus is fixed 
and another sets of CPUs are on different memory buses and the various processing (computing) nodes are connected by means of a high speed connection. 
This architecture is in contrast with another computer system architecture SMP (Symmetric Multi-Processing) where all memory access is shared through a single memory bus. 

Normally in a NUMA architecture system, the processors experience very low latencies for accessing the local memory in comparison to the SMP architecture based systems but for accessing the remote memory , the latencies are of relatively higher magnitude. 
owing to the above description, this type of memory organization architecture has been named as "Non Uniform Memory Access" architecture. 

The NUMA architecture primarily addresses the scalability bottleneck of the SMP architecture in the distributed multiprocessing systems 
caused by choking of bandwidth of multiple CPUs accessing the same memory bus.

The NUMA architecture based systems are normally cache coherent and are also therefore referred to as ccNUMA. 

Generally, most of the CPU architectures use relatively small but very fast non shared memory to make reference in the vicinity of the memory accesses. 
This memory, known as cache, in case of the NUMA based architecture is normally localized to the system memory bus. 

The cache coherent NUMA with localized and independent cache for each system bus is much more efficiently managable because it is easier to omit the inconsistencies between 
the cache and main memory which may arise if the cache is shared across multiple CPU sets in a distributed multiprocessing environment.

Most popular operating systems such as VMS, AIX, HP-UX, Solaris,the current version of Windows XP (SP2) and Windows Server 2003 fully support NUMA systems. 

Some of the current computer systems using NUMA architectures include the multi processor systems based AMD Opteron processor, 
Intel Itanium systems (generally using Intel E8870 chipsets), HP (Integrity and Superdome) etc.

http://it.toolbox.com/wiki/index.php/NUMA_Architecture